For those that haven't finished Mass Effect 3, the first part of my review will be spoiler free, but the second part must be rife with spoilers because the story and ending is the biggest problem of the game. I'll also preface this review by saying that the ME series had been probably my favorite gaming series of all times, and I beat the campaign of ME1 three times while I finished the campaign of ME2 four times. I had been incredibly excited about the game, and had been able to avoid practically every spoiler except for two smaller ones about EDI and the Prothean character. Even though the game is flawed, I loved pretty much 99% of the game, but the ending was so bad that it has ruined my entire Mass Effect experience. I was going to play the game again with my female character as I loved the voice over work of Jennifer Hale, but now I don't really want to. I was even going to start a new character in ME1 and play all three games in succession, but now it just isn't worth it.So, let's start with the gameplay, which in the Mass Effect series is split between the RPG aspects, and the third person cover shooting battle system. ME3 definitely has the best action gameplay of the entire series, and while it can still be clunky there are constantly amazing moments with dozens of different but equally awesome strategies you could employ. I just wish there were almost more buttons on the controller for this game. It's one of the most effective uses of a controller in any shooter, where you really have so many different attacks you could use at every moment. Most of the clunkiness once again resolves around the action button being the same as the sprint and cover button. I'm not sure if it would work, but it could be interesting if the action button was instead mapped to the select button, the only one that isn't used in the game.Now on to the RPG systems of the game, which is much improved from basic systems in ME2, for Mass Effect 3 they basically took most of what was in ME1 and stripped out the hassle of the massive inventory screen and the repetitive/annoying/time-consuming aspect of destroying/selling the multitude of useless items you received. This interesting new inventory management system works by all of the weapons having a weight, and if you go over a certain weight limit (which is dependent on your character class and certain upgrades you can choose) you can face severe power regeneration penalties. I love this idea, but it can become annoying when all of the good weapons have really high weight. It also ends up limiting the weapons you can bring along, even though I was a Vanguard that selected the increase weight capacity upgrade. There's a possible related result, where you can no longer carry any heavy weapons like in previous games, something that I always loved. Instead there are only four heavy weapons found at few certain points lying on the ground (flamethrower, rocket launcher, some Geth laser gun, and the mini-nuke) with very limited ammo. Back to the main weapons that are in this game, I loved that Bioware brought back the Role Playing elements present in ME1 guns, almost keeping the same names and level presentation. The concept is really smart, where you can purchase an upgrade up to level 5 for each weapon and each weapon add-on (that you can have two equipped on each gun). The only problems here is that I had enough money so that each time I got a new gun I promptly maxed out the upgrades, so the system wasn't as rewarding as it could have been. Also, with the level of each add-on upgrading when you find or buy a new one, while I love this, it was a little uneven where multiple times I upgraded ones I didn't use while I couldn't find the upgrades for the ones I did regularly use. This whole system could be improved with a few adjustments, which is possibly a higher level cut-off limit like in Multiplayer (could make it so that weapons that you like don't become useless because of their stats later in the game) and something that I liked in the first game but disappeared in the sequels. That is a weapon efficiency upgrade system where you could get experience points for every enemy you kill with each weapon type, I think this could really increase the RPG feel while keeping all of the action. One more thing with the weapons, there's an interesting section of the Spectre offices where you have a fire range to test your weapon load-out. I love this idea, especially with all of the different weapons, but it makes no sense to have it on the Citadel, instead it should be in the Normandy Cargo Bay. Too many times I would upgrade a new weapon only to find I didn't like the way it fired. Then there are weapons that I never tried out as their weight was really high and the stats weren't the best. So while I may have possibly liked the way they fired, now I'll never know as I didn't have an opportunity to test them out.I was pretty disappointed that no real changes (non-cosmetic) were made to the armor system. It's much too basic, almost exactly the same as ME2, and I wish there were more options to alter and upgrade your armor. I really kept the same armor for most of the game, even later I just made a few adjustments and all I cared about was getting the bonus percentages I wanted. The armor also looked all pretty similar, except for the helmets, which were mostly pretty goofy looking. Finally, for the different character classes, in this iteration they seem about the same, but some new abilities have been added. One of them that I really loved was the new Nova attack which was really useful when combined with the Biotic Charge, also I like that it's not perfect as it uses up your shields, creating an interesting cost versus benefit play choice.The next aspect of the game is one that has really defined to series up to this point, and that is the conversation system of ME3. I was very disappointed that the conversation options were much more limited in this iteration, where you basically only had the paragon or renegade choice. There was never a paragade response or something else like the sarcastic comments I loved making in Dragon Age 2, at this point in the series it felt like a step back. There was also an annoying amount of conversations that resembled your talks with the DLC characters Massani and Goto. I didn't mind this too much, but it was frustrating when multiple times I would accidently hit the A button one too many times and I would skip the conversation. I also had a few graphics glitches during the normal conversations with choices, where the character's framework was broken or glitched, and they'd be looking all over the place or the eyes would be tracking wrong, it was just really weird. Even stranger, this tended to happen earlier in the game (they either occurred with Liara or Ravik), I didn't really experience it too much later, I'm not sure why. Possibly relating to this, I didn't have any problems importing my character's face as some have, but I think that's because I played around with it in ME2 because I didn't love my Shepard's face.There were multiple times in conversations where there were great little inside joke comments that were only for my Shepard, but I was a little disappointed that there weren't more new in depth conversations with your crew. Even with the new character Vega, while I love the sparring match/conversation you had with him (One of my favorite crew member interactions in the whole series) you don't get to know him as much as you did the previous game's characters. I understand that with the possibility of almost every old character not being present in ME3, the developer didn't want to spend too much time and money on them, but conversely they didn't add many new characters. In total, not counting the DLC character, there are only four new crew members on the Normandy (all of whom are humans): the new playable jock character, a gay male pilot, a gay female communications officer, and a female reporter. I liked all of these new characters (though the reporter is a little generic and annoying) but consider something for a minute. If Garrus and Tali had died in your playthrough of ME2, for most of the game you would only have two playable characters, Vega and Liara. Later of course, you get Kaidan/Ashley and EDI, but it's amazing they didn't add new characters or make more of the characters from ME2 crew members. Even with all of the crew members possible, you don't get a representative from the Krogans and the Salarians, or any of the other non-council races. I expected to see all of the different species send someone onto the Normandy, but for some reason no one did. All we got was a Krogan leader (Wrex!), a Turian leader, and a Quarian leader in the War Room for a few missions. You'd think that if Bioware didn't want to waste time and money on possibly unpopular characters, they would have created more characters that every player would get to know. The only possible explanation for why they didn't do this is that they didn't think they had the time to establish multiple new interesting characters.Another annoying change to something I loved before, was how when you're in the hub-world listening to people's interesting conversations you have to leave the area and come back to hear the next part of the story. In ME2, you could just keep hitting the A button to listen to the rest of the conversation, which to me worked really well. This time, even though the stories are cool, I would lose interest in them as so much time could pass between each part of the telling, also at one point they glitched out and all of the conversations reset. I also had a problem that I figure has to be a glitch where at the last conversation with the Illusive Man, the Paragon and Renegade options were greyed out. With this Shepard I have always selected the blue conversation options in each Mass Effect game every time they appeared, and I also always explore every possible conversation option. I had off the charts amounts of Reputation and Paragon points and still I had a conversation option blocked, the first time this has ever happened to me (in the Mass Effect series and every other video game with a similar conversation system). I felt extremely confused and annoyed that somehow the best possible resolution to the Illusive Man conflict wasn't available to me for no apparent reason.Onto the locations and exploration of the different worlds, something that was one of my favorite parts of the previous games, but is almost non-existent in ME3. Here is where ME3 strikingly reminds me of the failure of Dragon Age 2. Similarly to Kirkwall, the Citadel acts as the only hub-world in the entire Mass Effect 3 game, while in ME2 there were four completely different hub-worlds. This would be okay, as most worlds are under attack from the Reapers, except for the fact that this version of the Citadel is the smallest and most basic of the entire Mass Effect trilogy. Then the Citadel only goes through a very minor cosmetic change halfway through the game, and they expect us, a society full of ADHD people, not to grow bored of the surroundings. We get to go to worlds we've always wanted to explore, like the Turian, Salarian, Quarian, Asari and Human home-worlds, but all of them are filled with waist high walls and they're all being blown up by Reapers and/or attacked by Cerberus. The missions are also relatively short, and we fail to really see anything unique about the planets. Further, ME3 has essentially eliminated the mini missions on random worlds, and the probe mechanic found in ME2. Instead, now you have to fly around each system evading the Reapers while you randomly scan for 2 or 3 of the interesting things, which are either small amounts of fuel or some random unexplained war asset on a planet. Then you get to play a few basic solo N7 missions on the limited number of Multiplayer maps. I understand that exploring Alien worlds isn't a priority in the middle of a war with a group of ancient synthetic/organic hybrid monster spaceships, but I missed this aspect that was hugely present in the previous games.Related to the locations and explorations, I'm going to talk a little bit about the further development of the alien species you encounter. Sadly, we see very little new aspects of the previously introduced alien species, and no new aliens. One thing we do see is our first Krogan female, who is a very cool character, though the time spent with her is short. Also, you don't see too much of the Krogan woman, but this kind of makes sense when you consider the Krogan society. Once again, every other species' females are non-existent, I guess Bioware believes the Asari provide enough females for everyone. Also, I can explain away why we don't see many of the other races' females (though we probably should see them as refugees or scientists), but I find it weird that we don't see any Turian females. From Garrus' previous stories, it has been established that females can serve in their military and can compete with the best of the males (also they're apparently very flexible but don't have much reach). The one new design that Bioware were extremely successful in creating was that of the Prothean. They succeeded in looking like the Collectors and were just extremely cool. I loved even more the reality of what their culture was in comparison to what everyone had believed. The only problem is that for some reason Bioware decided to make this important and awesome character first-day DLC.  Finally, the worst aspects of the new alien design in ME3 are the Quarians.I either wanted Bioware to keep the Quarians faces secret, or I wanted a beautiful scene to show off Tali's true face, they even had the perfect situation when they are on her home planet of Rannoch. Instead Bioware was lazy, and they just had Tali give a picture to Shepard that he could keep in his cabin. This picture showed a poorly photo-shopped stock photo of a cute human woman that probably took an hour or two to make. Every single piece of Tali fan art I've seen is a hundred times better than what Bioware chose. Since Turians and Quarians are so closely related (same amino acid structure) then they would probably look more similar to each other instead of being human (except for some tattoos and different hands). Of course, they would be also be different in many ways (the Turian world experienced a lot of radiation which caused them to develop the armor plates) and there was something about the Quarians where they have a symbiosis with the plant life on their world, and because of this their immune systems weren't fully developed (this was then made worse by years and years spent on sterile space ships). Even if Bioware wanted a mostly human design to appease Tali fans (which there is some precedent for as the eyes and nose appear human behind the mask) I've seen much better humanoid designs for Tali. I mean it's a little strange where fans are more talented and spend more time creating images of a very important design than the official developer.Here's where I'm going to stick a bunch of the random features in the game. I was a bit surprised by the complete elimination of mini-games in ME3, while they were all a little annoying before, instead of fixing them now they just removed them, and the doors/safes take a little longer to open, implying that you're automatically performing some type of hack or bypass. The reputation system is a much appreciated addition/adaptation, where you get standard reputation points for performing moral neutral actions, and every Paragon or Renegade point adds to your total. Because of this, players are no longer punished from not being an absolute character, and no matter you preference if you have enough reputation points both of the Paragon and Renegade conversation choices are unlocked. However, it is pretty goofy how the bar is filled up very early into the game, I was still getting lots of points, but there was no visual interpretation of the increase. I almost wish there was a bigger bar, or even a numerical presentation of all of your reputation points. Another new addition to this game is the War Assets and Effective Military Strength (EMS). I really liked this feature, as everything you've done in the Mass Effect series is represented here. However, once again the bar fills up incredibly early in the game. There's also some really disturbing about the EMS, and that's the aspect of Galactic Readiness, which can only be increased by playing multiplayer. So if you hate Co-op Multiplayer, or if you don't have enough money or the ability to have an Xbox Live Gold Membership, your Galactic Readiness is locked at 50%. This means that all of your War Assets will be halved for the EMF. So let's look at my level, I had 7245 points with a Galactic Readiness hovering around 100%. If I wouldn't have played Multiplayer, then I would have only had 3622 EMF points, which is enough to get the endings but is not enough to get the "best" ending. To put this in perspective, I played every mission available except for a few that glitched out on me. The only things that might have lowered my war assets, were that in ME1 I saved the Council, in ME2 I destroyed the Collector Base (even though for the story Cerberus still found most of it intact), and in ME3 I cured the Krogan Genophage which annoyed the Salarians. One other random thing, in ME3 you don't have someone like Kelly that will take care of your fish. The only option is to buy a crazy expensive Aquarium VI, and if you don't your fish will die, even if you feed them every chance you get. You'd think EDI would be able to monitor your fish tank for free, but I guess it'd be a little degrading considering her new role as a crew member on herself.Now onto the last aspect of the game that isn't the story, and that is the newly added Co-op Multiplayer. I was initially concerned about this aspect of the game, but I've had a lot of fun playing with it. I did have a lot of problems with the EA servers the first couple of days though, and this was exasperated by the fact that you only get experience and credits by either successfully completing the mission, or by dying. I wish that the game would save your experience after each wave, especially when any expendable items you use before you disconnect are lost forever. After this I also glitched out a couple times, once I got stuck in a wall, but I was actually still able to kill a bunch of the enemies while some of them were unable to get me. Another time I glitched out during multiplayer, it was much worse and much weirder, where the whole stage was shaking like I was in the middle of an earthquake. Then while I was running, I ended up floating in the air for a few feet before falling through the floor (I actually have a video of it but it's kind of crappy since I couldn't find my camera and used my iPod). Sadly or thankfully, my team members were a capable bunch (even though it was a silver Reaper mission) and were able to beat the 10 waves, though it took like 20 minutes where I just had to float there in nothingness and wait. The even weirder thing was that I could damage some of the enemies with biotic powers, and the enemies were able to kill me. However, once I died I would immediately come back to life. Looking past the glitches, I love leveling up the different characters, and with a group of capable players the missions can be very fun. However, after a while I grew a little bored playing the missions, they're all just too similar. Then I worked really hard on maxing out the Vanguard branch, but when I hit level 20, to get the achievement I promoted the soldiers. This is a cool idea, but I wish there was more of a reward for this, or possibly the ability to still use the high level characters when attempting a Gold level mission, or at the very least a new character plus where they get an extra bonus so you're not starting from the very beginning of the character. The biggest problem I have with the multiplayer though is that EA decided to for the first time in a AAA console game to include a freemium pricing structure for the locked characters, weapons and items. I actually find this kind of offensive, as I could play the multiplayer for hours and get a random pack someone else could get immediately by shilling out two dollars. I especially have a problem with this pricing as you could spend two dollars on a pack, and get nothing you could use. If you're going to charge for items others could get by just playing the game, I think you should be able to pick items, although of course it would make it even more unfair for people that don't want to be tricked into paying for items that are already in the game. I think that the Multiplayer could be saved with a patch, and possibly more game modes than the 10 waves that always feature the play modes capture the flag, secure the base, head-hunt certain enemies, and kill everything moving. As it currently stands, I can't see this multiplayer establishing a consistent faithful base for anything nearing long term.Now, I can finally get to the aspect of the game that had me the most upset/frustrated, and that is the story. From here on in, warning, there be major spoilers ahead. Right from the start of the game the story is goofy. A minute after our first look at the ME universe's Earth, the Reapers attack, not giving the player any time to acclimate to the game. Then a little later (after a goofy child's death that will haunt Shepard for the rest of the game) you are introduced to the game's one and only plot device, blueprints for an all-powerful weapon designed but not completed by the Protheans, called the Crucible. This is just so generic and out of the blue, it doesn't make any sense, but I was ok with playing along. You then have a mission involving each of the previous ME game's characters, some small and some large. The developers then proceed to kill off two of my favorite characters in these missions, Mordin and Thane. However, I can accept their deaths, especially since it was established previously that both of them were near death (old age and lung disease respectively) and both of them were done very well, they had good deaths. I admit that I felt serious emotion with both of them, and I may or may not have cried through the whole hospital scene.I have a lot of problems with the development of Cerberus as the main antagonist in a game about the Reapers. I understand that Bioware wanted to provide different enemies to face, and I admit that their AI and designs are excellent. However, I don't understand how Cerberus became so powerful. Every time you see them they're a step ahead of you, even when you kill hundreds or thousands of their heavily armed and trained troops. Later they kind of explain this by establishing that they created a refugee Sanctuary that was actually a Human harvesting and indoctrination factory, but it still doesn't quite add up. I didn't love Cerberus in ME2, and things they've done had always been on the border of indecency and terrorism, but it usually seemed to be in Humanity's best interest. However, in ME3 they're all crazy and doing absolutely horrible incomprehensible things, Bioware tries to say it's all because TIM has been slowly indoctrinated and he's now under control of the Reapers, but I never really thought they successfully established this. Probably the goofiest Cerberus plot line is the coup of the Citadel, which made absolutely zero sense. They somehow gained control of Udina (who while being a douche bag didn't have any connections to Cerberus and had no reason to betray the rest of the Council) and managed to infiltrate the Citadel which is supposed to be the safest and most guarded place in the Galaxy (they even again said they upgraded the security). Then they for some reason wanted to assassinate the entire council, for reasons that are never explained.Up until around halfway through the game, I didn't love the story, but I was in love with the game and having a lot of fun playing it. I mean the actual story for ME2 was pretty basic and goofy, but I still absolutely loved the game. Then, after the previously mentioned Cerberus coup of the Citadel, I received the first realization that Bioware might not care about their fans, or that they might possibly even hate us. Previously in the Citadel, you met up and talked to Kelly Chambers in the refugee camp. There was a great little scene where after asking if she wants to rejoin the Normandy, she describes the horror she experienced on the Collector ship, and that she can't be on the Normandy as it reminds her of what she faced. Instead, she's helping the refugees coming into the Citadel. I loved this little interaction, and I thought it was great fan service for people that liked Kelly. Then after the coup, when walking around the refugee camp you hear two people talking and they basically say "Have you seen that red headed woman who was helping out so much?" "You didn't hear? A Cerberus soldier came up asking if she was Kelly Chambers, and after she said yes he just shot her in the head." "Huh, I guess if Cerberus asks you if you're someone, you should just say no." "Hah hah hah."  This was a character I spent the whole of ME2 talking to and growing to care about, and Bioware decided to kill her off so disrespectfully and unnecessarily, I was just absolutely horrified. I wished I could have never heard that conversation, but no, it will now always be in my brain.After this point, everything was ok, not perfect but I pretty much enjoyed all of the events and there were some truly awesome kickass scenes (I loved the fight where you called on the mother of all Thresher Maws and the brokering of peace between the Quarians and Geth), until the final battle to retake Earth. The whole strategy for retaking Earth was a little goofy, but I didn't mind it too much. There was also a great area where before the final battle you walk around the camp and talk to all of your party members, and you can even call and talk to the previous game's characters that aren't playable in ME3. The conversations are a little short, but I enjoyed all of them. Then after fighting for a while, you get to the beam to take you to the Citadel (Which was overtaken by the Reapers without any explanation of how & you can assume billions of people were killed) and everything breaks apart in a million pieces. You know the developer did something wrong when fan created explanations/interpretations make more sense than what we were actually given (The most logical being that the whole Citadel sequence was an indoctrinated dream). Other people have more succinctly examined and explained all of the different problems and plot holes, so I won't go too in depth here. Nevertheless, you are apparently hit by the Reaper's laser beam that destroys everything it touches, but here you only get some melted armor and a beat up face. You also receive a very powerful heavy pistol with unlimited ammo that you use to kill the Reaper creations between you and the teleportation beam. When you get to the beam and are transported to the Citadel, somehow both the Illusive Man and Anderson beat you to the main room. There's this whole thing where somehow TIM is able to control your body and make you shoot Anderson, but you are able to break control and kill TIM.After ascending the elevator to the merged Crucible and Citadel console, a God-like AI in the form of the dead child from Earth appears. Here, Bioware for some reason decides to give you more questions instead of providing the player with any answers. The God-child says that the Reapers are his answer to the problem that Synthetic life (pure order) will eventually completely wipe out all Organic life (pure chaos). Basically, the Reapers were created to save Organic life from Synthetics by murdering and harvesting every developed race each 50,000 years (A synthetic being created hybrids to kill organics to save them from being killed by synthetics). Through this whole interaction, Shepard acts completely subjugated and accepts everything the child says as absolute truth. You are finally given three options, you can control the Reapers (presented as the blue or Paragon choice even though it was represented by TIM, who was at least a Renegade character), you could destroy the Reapers along with all synthetic life (presented as the red or Renegade choice even though it was represented by Anderson, who was absolutely a Paragon character), or you could take the third option which would merge all organic and synthetic life (presented by no one, but this is obviously the choice that the God-child AI wants). Then, no matter what choice you make, as long as your war assets are beyond a very small level, Shepard dies, the Reapers leave Earth or are destroyed, every Mass Relay is destroyed (hopefully in a way different than what was seen in the Arrival DLC or entire systems might have been wiped out of existence), and the Normandy (After Joker apparently flees the battle on Earth) just barely escapes the blast and crash lands on an Eden-like planet, with characters that were just with you rushing the beam somehow being magically transported to the Normandy.Then that's it, the game is over except for a ridiculous conversation featuring a star-child and an old man taking place in a forest that resembles the one in Shepard's dream (and a flash of Shepard taking a breath if you had enough EMS and chose to destroy the Reapers). Oh, also there's an insulting message telling you to buy the future DLC Bioware releases, and you're set up back on the Normandy before the raid on the Cerberus base. I literally walked all around the Normandy trying to talk to everyone, and it felt like I was in a different dimension, it was just so weird and awkward. The only real difference between the three endings is the color of the beam the Crucible emits and the explosion that follows. When faced with the choice, I watched each ending on Youtube, and decided on the Green/Synthesis ending. Partly because it was the weirdest, but mostly because Edi and Joker embrace in that end, and if I had to die & the universe had to be irreversibly changed (most likely leading to many of the stranded races on Earth dying of starvation and never seeing their homes or loved ones) at least someone could find some happiness in this ending.So why am I and almost every Mass Effect fan outraged at the ending"s" Bioware gave us? (In one poll found on the official Mass Effect forums 91% of around 60,000 fans hated the ending and wants Bioware to change it completely, and 6% still wanted the ending slightly adjusted). First and foremost, the ending is so bleak and depressing, that there is no opportunity for happiness or even a sense of accomplishment that should come with beating a video game. I've never before played a game that punished me for beating it. Then there are so many plot holes with weird and abrupt revelations that make no sense. However, the biggest problem with the ending is that no choice that you made in all three games has any bearing on the outcome. As long as your Shepard didn't die in ME2 and you have the minimum amount of war assets or EMS in ME3 you get the same ending as someone that worked hard in each Mass Effect game and created their perfect Shepard story, maxing out all of the meters, doing all of the missions. I wouldn't have liked any ending where Shepard dies, but I could have accepted it if it was well done and provided closure, instead of just appearing to be the crumpled pieces of paper that a writer with any talent would have thrown into the trash.The prevailing sense of hopelessness despair and depression was never before found in the Mass Effect games. Even though you faced suicide missions, if you did everything right only one of your team members died in the games, and the overall mission was always essentially a complete success (There were always a large amount of casualties, but they were all blank faces). I really can't see how anyone at Bioware would have liked this ending. I've come to the conclusion that either Bioware doesn't care about their long term fans, hates their long term fans, or are so stupid that they thought the fans would actually like the ending they provided (or possibly a fourth option where they're just being trolls and the whole ending was a dream sequence and the true ending is being released as DLC, although I would probably associate this option as aligning closely to "they don't care about
